=pod

=head1 NAME



B<xpaset: send data to one or more XPA servers>



=head1 SYNOPSIS





<data> | xpaset  [-h] [-i nsinet] [-m method] [-n] [-p] [-s] [-t sval,lval] [-u users] [-v] <template|host:port> [paramlist]





=head1 OPTIONS





  -h		print help message
  -i		access XPA point on different machine (override XPA_NSINET)
  -m		override XPA_METHOD environment variable
  -n		don't wait for the status message after server completes
  -p		don't read (or send) buf data from stdin
  -s		enter server mode
  -t [s,l]	set short and long timeouts (override XPA_[SHORT,LONG]_TIMEOUT)
  -u [users]	XPA points can be from specified users (override XPA_NSUSERS)
  -v		verify message to stdout
  --version     display version and exit




=head1 DESCRIPTION




Data read from stdin will be sent to access points matching the 
template
or host:port.
A set of qualifying parameters can be appended.

Normally, xpaset reads data input from stdin until EOF and sends those
data to the XPA target, along with parameters entered on the command
line. For example to send a FITS file to the ds9 image display:

  cat foo.fits | xpaset ds9 fits


Sometimes, however, it is desirable to send only parameters to an XPA
access point, without sending data. For such cases, use the -p switch to
indicate that there is no data being send to stdin. For example, to
change the colormap used by the ds9 image display program, use:

  csh> xpaset -p ds9 cmap Heat

Of course, this also can be accomplished by sending EOF to stdin in
any of the usual ways:

  csh> echo "" | xpaset ds9 cmap Heat
  csh> xpaget ds9 cmap Heat < /dev/null
  csh> xpaset ds9 cmap Heat
  ^D			# Ctl-D signals EOF


The -s switch puts xpaset into server mode, in which commands and data
can be sent to access points without having to run xpaset multiple times.
(Its not clear if this buys you much!) The syntax for sending commands
in server mode is:


  csh> xpaset -s
  xpaset ds9 colormap I8
  ^D
  xpaset ds9 regions
  circle 200 300 40
  circle 300 400 50
  ^D
etc.

After the  required "xpaset" command is specified, optional ASCII data
can be appended (as in the region example).  A single data/command set is
delimited by ^D. Note that typing ^D when a command is expected terminates
the program.

NB: server mode only works from the terminal and only ASCII data can be
sent in this way.

B<Examples:>

  csh> xpaset ds9 file < foo.fits
  csh> echo "stop" | xpaset myhost:12345





=head1 SEE ALSO



See xpa(n) for a list of XPA help pages


=cut
