=pod

=head1 NAME



B<xpamb: the XPA Message Bus>



=head1 SYNOPSIS





The xpamb program can act as a "classical" message bus interface
between clients and servers. A client can send a data request to
the message bus, which then interfaces with multiple servers and
returns the data back to the client.



=head1 OPTIONS





For xpaset, several optional switches are used to save data and
manipulate the stored data:


=over 4






=item *

B<-data [name]>


Add the supplied data buffer to a pool of stored data buffers,
using the specified name as a unique identifier for later retrieval.
An error occurs if the name already exists (use either B<replace>
or B<del> to rectify this). The B<-add> switch is supported
for backwards compatibility with xpa 2.0.




=item *

B<-replace [name]>


Replace previously existing stored data having the same unique name
with new data. This essentially is a combination of the B<del>
and B<data> commands.




=item *

B<-info ["'info string'"]>


When adding a data buffer, you can specify an informational
string to be stored with that data.  This string will be returned
by xpaget:

  xpaget xpamb foo -info

(along with other information such as the date/time of storage and the size of
the data buffer) if the -info switch is specified. If the info string contains
spaces, you must enclose it in B<two> sets of quotes:

  cat foo | xpaset xpamb -store foo -info "'this is info on foo'"

The first set of quotes is removed by the shell while the second is used to
delineate the info string.




=item *

B<-send [name]>


Broadcast the stored data buffer to the named template.




=item *

B<-del [name]>


Delete the named data buffer and free all allocated space.


=back




Switches can be used in any combination that makes sense. For example:

  cat foo.fits | xpaset xpamb -store foo -info "FITS" "DS9:*" fits foo.fits

will broadcast the foo.fits image to all access points of class
B<DS9>.  In addition, the foo.fits file will be stored under the
name of B<foo> for later manipulation such as:

  xpaset -p xpamb -send foo "DS9:*" fits foo.fits

will re-broadcast the foo.fits image to all access points of class "DS9".



=head1 DESCRIPTION





A "classical" message bus (such as ToolTalk) consists of servers and
clients, along with a mediating program that transfers data between
different processes. XPA takes a slightly different approach in that
communication between clients and servers is direct.  This generally
is the correct technique when there is only one connection (or even a
small number of connections), but can become inefficient for the
serving program if a large amount of data is being transferred to many
clients. For example, if a real-time data acquisition program is
broadcasting a FITS image to several clients, it would need to
transmit that image to each client individually.  This might interfere
with its own processing cycles.  The preferable mechanism would be to
pass the image off to an intermediate program that can then broadcast
the data to the several clients.

The B<xpamb> program can alleviate such problems by functioning
as a message bus in cases where such an intermediary process is
wanted.  It pre-defines a single access point named
B<XPAMB:xpamb> to which data can be sent for re-broadcast. You
also can tell B<xpamb> to save the data, and associate with that
data a new access point, so that it can be retrieved later on.


All interaction with B<xpamb> is performed through
B<xpaset> and B<xpaget> (or the corresponding API
routines, B<XPASet()> and B<XPAGet()>) to the
B<XPAMB:xpamb> access point. That is, B<xpamb> is just
another XPA-enabled program that responds to requests from
clients. The paramlist is used to specify the targets to which
the data will be for re-broadcast, as well as the re-broadcast paramlist:

  data | xpaset xpamb [switches] broadcast-target broadcast-paramlist

Optional switches are used to store data, and manipulate stored data,
and are described below.


In its simplest form, you can, for example, send a FITS image to xpamb for
broadcasting to all ds9 image simply by executing:

  cat foo.fits | xpaset xpamb "DS9:*" fits foo.fits

Since B<DS9> is the class name for the ds9 image display
program, this will result in the FITS image being re-sent to all fits
access points for all active image display programs.


You can send stored data and new data to the same set of access points at
the same time.  The stored data always is send first, followed by the new
data:

  cat foo2.fits | xpaset xpamb -send foo "DS9:*" fits foo.fits

will first send the foo.fits file, and then the foo2.fits file to all
access points of class B<DS9>.  Notice that in this example,
the foo2.fits file is not stored, but it could be stored by using the
B<-store [name]> switch on the command line.


The B<xpaget> command can be used to retrieve a data from XPA
access points or from a stored data buffer, or retrieve information
about a stored data buffer.  If no arguments are given:

  xpaget xpamb

then information about all currently stored data buffers is returned. This
information includes the data and time at which the data was stored, the
size in bytes of the data, and the supplied info string.


If arguments are specified, they will be in the form:

  xpaget xpamb [-info] [-data] [name [paramlist]]

If the optional B<-info> and/or B<-data> switches are specified, then
information and/or data will be returned for the named data buffer
following the switches. You can use either or both of these switches
in a single command. For example, if the -info switch is used:

  xpaget xpamb -info foo

then the info about that stored data buffer will be returned.
If the -data is used with a specific name:

  xpaget xpamb -data foo

then the stored data itself will be returned. If both are used:

  xpaget xpamb -info -data foo

then the info will be returned, followed by the data. Note that it is an
error to specify one of these switches without a data buffer name and that
the paramlist will be ignored.


If neither the B<-info> or B<-data> switch is specified, then
the name refers to an XPA access point (with an optional paramlist
following).
For example:

  xpaget xpamb ds9 file

is equivalent to:

  xpaget ds9 file




=head1 SEE ALSO



See xpa(n) for a list of XPA help pages



=cut
