=pod

=head1 NAME



B<fundisp - display data in a Funtools data file>



=head1 SYNOPSIS





fundisp  [-f format] [-l] [-n] [-T] <iname> [columns|bitpix=n]





=head1 OPTIONS





  -f      # format string for display
  -l      # display image as a list containing the columns X, Y, VAL
  -n      # don't output header
  -F [c]  # use specified character as column separator (def: space)
  -T      # output in rdb/starbase format (tab separators) 




=head1 DESCRIPTION




B<fundisp> displays the data in the specified 
FITS Extension
and/or
Image Section
of a FITS file, or in a
Section
of a non-FITS array or raw event file.

The first argument to the program specifies the FITS input image, array, or
raw event file to display.  If "stdin" is specified, data are read from
the standard input. Use Funtools Bracket
Notation to specify FITS extensions, image sections, and filters.


If the data being displayed are columns (either in a FITS binary table
or a raw event file), the individual rows are listed. Filters can be
added using bracket notation. Thus:

  [sh] fundisp "test.ev[time-(int)time>.15]"
         X       Y     PHA        PI             TIME         DX         DY
   ------- ------- ------- --------- ---------------- ---------- ----------
        10       8      10         8          17.1600       8.50      10.50
         9       9       9         9          17.1600       9.50       9.50
        10       9      10         9          18.1600       9.50      10.50
        10       9      10         9          18.1700       9.50      10.50
         8      10       8        10          17.1600      10.50       8.50
         9      10       9        10          18.1600      10.50       9.50
         9      10       9        10          18.1700      10.50       9.50
        10      10      10        10          19.1600      10.50      10.50
        10      10      10        10          19.1700      10.50      10.50
        10      10      10        10          19.1800      10.50      10.50

[NB: The FITS binary table test file test.ev, as well as the FITS
image test.fits, are contained in the funtools funtest directory.]


When a table is being displayed using B<fundisp>, a second optional
argument can be used to specify the columns to display.  For example:

  [sh] fundisp "test.ev[time-(int)time>=.99]" "x y time"
          X        Y                  TIME
   -------- -------- ---------------------
          5       -6           40.99000000
          4       -5           59.99000000
         -1        0          154.99000000
         -2        1          168.99000000
         -3        2          183.99000000
         -4        3          199.99000000
         -5        4          216.99000000
         -6        5          234.99000000
         -7        6          253.99000000



The special column B<$REGION> can be specified to display the
region id of each row:

  [sh $] fundisp "test.ev[time-(int)time>=.99&&annulus(0 0 0 10 n=3)]" 'x y time $REGION'
          X        Y                  TIME     REGION
   -------- -------- --------------------- ----------
          5       -6           40.99000000          3
          4       -5           59.99000000          2
         -1        0          154.99000000          1
         -2        1          168.99000000          1
         -3        2          183.99000000          2
         -4        3          199.99000000          2
         -5        4          216.99000000          2
         -6        5          234.99000000          3
         -7        6          253.99000000          3


Here only rows with the proper fractional time and whose position also is
within one of the three annuli are displayed.

Columns can be excluded from display using a minus sign before the
column:

  [sh $] fundisp "test.ev[time-(int)time>=.99]" "-time"
          X        Y      PHA         PI          DX          DY
   -------- -------- -------- ---------- ----------- -----------
          5       -6        5         -6        5.50       -6.50
          4       -5        4         -5        4.50       -5.50
         -1        0       -1          0       -1.50        0.50
         -2        1       -2          1       -2.50        1.50
         -3        2       -3          2       -3.50        2.50
         -4        3       -4          3       -4.50        3.50
         -5        4       -5          4       -5.50        4.50
         -6        5       -6          5       -6.50        5.50
         -7        6       -7          6       -7.50        6.50

All columns except the time column are displayed.

The special column B<$N> can be specified to display the
ordinal value of each row. Thus, continuing the previous example:

  fundisp "test.ev[time-(int)time>=.99]" '-time $n'
         X        Y      PHA         PI          DX          DY          N
   ------- -------- -------- ---------- ----------- ----------- ----------
         5       -6        5         -6        5.50       -6.50        337
         4       -5        4         -5        4.50       -5.50        356
        -1        0       -1          0       -1.50        0.50        451
        -2        1       -2          1       -2.50        1.50        465
        -3        2       -3          2       -3.50        2.50        480
        -4        3       -4          3       -4.50        3.50        496
        -5        4       -5          4       -5.50        4.50        513
        -6        5       -6          5       -6.50        5.50        531
        -7        6       -7          6       -7.50        6.50        550

Note that the column specification is enclosed in single quotes to protect
'$n' from begin expanded by the shell.


In general, the rules for activating and de-activating columns are:


=over 4




=item *

If only exclude columns are specified, then all columns but
the exclude columns will be activated.


=item *

If only include columns are specified, then only the specified columns
are activated.


=item *

If a mixture of include and exclude columns are specified, then
all but the exclude columns will be active; this last case
is ambiguous and the rule is arbitrary.


=back


In addition to specifying columns names explicitly, the special
symbols B<+> and B<-> can be used to activate and
de-activate B<all> columns. This is useful if you want to
activate the $REGION column along with all other columns.  According
to the rules, the syntax "$REGION" only activates the region column
and de-activates the rest. Use "+ $REGION" to activate all
columns as well as the region column.


If the data being displayed are image data (either in a FITS primary
image, a FITS image extension, or an array file), an mxn pixel display
is produced, where m and n are the dimensions of the image.  By
default, pixel values are displayed using the same data type as in the
file. However, for integer data where the BSCALE and BZERO header parameters
are present, the data is displayed as floats.  In either case, the
display data type can be overridden using an optional second argument
of the form:

  bitpix=n

where n is 8,16,32,-32,-64, for unsigned char, short, int, float and double,
respectively. 


Of course, running B<fundisp> on anything but the smallest image
usually results in a display whose size makes it unreadable.
Therefore, one can uses bracket notation (see below)
to apply section and/or blocking to the image before generating a
display. For example:

  [sh] fundisp "test.fits[2:6,2:7]" bitpix=-32
                     2          3          4          5          6
            ---------- ---------- ---------- ---------- ----------
         2:       3.00       4.00       5.00       6.00       7.00
         3:       4.00       5.00       6.00       7.00       8.00
         4:       5.00       6.00       7.00       8.00       9.00
         5:       6.00       7.00       8.00       9.00      10.00
         6:       7.00       8.00       9.00      10.00      11.00
         7:       8.00       9.00      10.00      11.00      12.00



Note that is is possible to display a FITS binary table as an image
simply by passing the table through B<funimage> first:

  [sh] ./funimage test.ev stdout | fundisp "stdin[2:6,2:7]" bitpix=8
                  2       3       4       5       6
            ------- ------- ------- ------- -------
         2:       3       4       5       6       7
         3:       4       5       6       7       8
         4:       5       6       7       8       9
         5:       6       7       8       9      10
         6:       7       8       9      10      11
         7:       8       9      10      11      12


If the B<-l> (list) switch is used, then an image is displayed as a
list containing the columns: X, Y, VAL. For example:

  fundisp -l "test1.fits[2:6,2:7]" bitpix=-32
            X          Y         VAL
   ---------- ---------- -----------
            2          2        6.00
            3          2        1.00
            4          2        1.00
            5          2        1.00
            6          2        1.00
            2          3        1.00
            3          3        5.00
            4          3        1.00
            5          3        1.00
            6          3        1.00
            2          4        1.00
            3          4        1.00
            4          4        4.00
            5          4        1.00
            6          4        1.00
            2          5        1.00
            3          5        1.00
            4          5        1.00
            5          5        3.00
            6          5        1.00
            2          6        1.00
            3          6        1.00
            4          6        1.00
            5          6        1.00
            6          6        2.00
            2          7        1.00
            3          7        1.00
            4          7        1.00
            5          7        1.00
            6          7        1.00



If the B<-n> (nohead) switch is used, then no header is output for
tables. This is useful, for example, when fundisp output is being
directed into gnuplot.


The B<fundisp> program uses a default set of display formats:

  datatype      TFORM   format
  --------      -----   --------
  double        D       "%21.8f"
  float         E       "%11.2f"
  int           J       "%10d"
  short         I       "%8d"
  byte          B       "%6d"
  string        A       "%12.12s"
  bits          X       "%8x"
  logical       L       "%1x"

Thus, the default display of 1 double and 2 shorts gives:

  [sh] fundisp snr.ev "time x y"
  
                    TIME        X        Y
   --------------------- -------- --------
       79494546.56818075      546      201
       79488769.94469175      548      201
       ...

You can change the display format for individual columns or for all
columns of a given data types by means of the -f switch.  The format
string that accompanies -f is a space-delimited list of keyword=format
values.  The keyword values can either be column names (in which case
the associated format pertains only to that column) or FITS table
TFORM specifiers (in which case the format pertains to all columns
having that data type). For example, you can change the double and
short formats for all columns like this:

  [sh] fundisp -f "D=%22.11f I=%3d" snr.ev "time x y"
  
                    TIME   X   Y
  ---------------------- --- ---
    79494546.56818075478 546 201
    79488769.94469174743 548 201
    ...



Alternatively, you can change the format of the time and x columns like this:

  [sh] fundisp -f "time=%22.11f x=%3d" snr.ev "time x y"
  
                    TIME   X        Y
  ---------------------- --- --------
    79494546.56818075478 546      201
    79488769.94469174743 548      201
    ...

Note that there is a potential conflict if a column has the same name
as one of the TFORM specifiers. In the examples above, the the "X"
column in the table has the same name as the X (bit) datatype.  To
resolve this conflict, the format string is processed such that
TFORM datatype specifiers are checked for first, using a
case-sensitive comparison. If the specified format value is not an
upper case TFORM value, then a case-insensitive check is made on the
column name.  This means that, in the examples above, "X=%3d" will refer
to the X (bit) datatype, while "x=%3d" will refer to the X column:

  [sh] fundisp -f "X=%3d" snr.ev "x y"
  
         X        Y
  -------- --------
       546      201
       548      201
       ...
  
  [sh] fundisp -f "x=%3d" snr.ev "x y"
  
    X        Y
  --- --------
  546      201
  548      201
  ...

As a rule, therefore, it is best always to specify the column name in
lower case and TFORM data types in upper case. 


The B<-f [format]> will change the format for a single execution
of fundisp. You also can use the B<FUN_FORMAT> envronment variable
to change the format for all invocations of fundisp. The format of this
environment variable's value is identical to that used with
the B<-f> switch. This global value can be overridden in
individual cases by use of the B<-f [format]> switch.


Caveats: Please also note that it is the user's responsibility to
match the format specifier to the column data type correctly. Also
note that, in order to maintain visual alignment between names and
columns, the column name will be truncated (on the left) if the
format width is less than the length of the name. However, truncation
is not performed if the output is in RDB format (using the -T switch).


[An older-style format string is supported but deprecated. It
consists of space-delimited C format statements for all data types,
specified in the following order:

 double float int short byte string bit.

This order of the list is based on the assumption that people generally
will want to change the float formats.

If "-" is entered instead of a format statement for a given data type, the
default format is used. Also, the format string can be terminated without
specifying all formats, and defaults will be used for the rest of the
list. Note that you must supply a minimum field width, i.e., "%6d" and
"%-6d" are legal, "%d" is not legal.

By using -f [format], you can change the double and short formats like this:

  [sh] fundisp -f "22.11f - - 3d" snr.ev "time x y"
  
                     TIME   X   Y
   ---------------------- --- ---
     79494546.56818075478 546 201
     79488769.94469174743 548 201
     ...

NB: This format is deprecated and will be removed in a future release.]


The B<-F[c]> switch can be used to specify a (single-character)
column separator (where the default is a space). Note that column
formatting will almost certainly also add spaces to pad individual
columns to the required width. These can be removed with a program
such as sed, at the cost of generating unaligned columns. For example:

fundisp -F',' snr.ev'[cir 512 512 .1]'
       X,       Y,     PHA,      PI,                 TIME,      DX,      DY
--------,--------,--------,--------,---------------------,--------,--------
     512,     512,       6,       7,    79493997.45854475,     578,     574
     512,     512,       8,       9,    79494575.58943175,     579,     573
     512,     512,       5,       6,    79493631.03866175,     578,     575
     512,     512,       5,       5,    79493290.86521725,     578,     575
     512,     512,       8,       9,    79493432.00990875,     579,     573

fundisp -F',' snr.ev'[cir 512 512 .1]' | sed 's/ *, */,/g'
       X,Y,PHA,PI,TIME,DX,DY
--------,--------,--------,--------,---------------------,--------,--------
     512,512,6,7,79493997.45854475,578,574
     512,512,8,9,79494575.58943175,579,573
     512,512,5,6,79493631.03866175,578,575
     512,512,5,5,79493290.86521725,578,575
     512,512,8,9,79493432.00990875,579,573

fundisp -f "x=%3d y=%3d pi=%1d pha=%1d time=%20.11f dx=%3d dy=%3d" -F',' snr.ev'[cir 512 512 .1]' | sed 's/ *, */,/g'
  X,Y,A,I,TIME,DX,DY
---,---,-,-,--------------------,---,---
512,512,6,7,79493997.45854474604,578,574
512,512,8,9,79494575.58943174779,579,573
512,512,5,6,79493631.03866174817,578,575
512,512,5,5,79493290.86521725357,578,575
512,512,8,9,79493432.00990875065,579,573




If the B<-T> (rdb table) switch is used, the output will conform
to starbase/rdb data base format: tabs will be inserted between
columns rather than spaces. This format is not available when
displaying image pixels (except in conjunction with the B<-l>
switch).


Finally, note that B<fundisp> can be used to create column filters from
the auxiliary tables in a FITS file. For example, the following shell code
will generate a good-time interval (GTI) filter for X-ray data files that
contain a standard GTI extension:

  #!/bin/sh
  sed '1,/---- .*/d
  /^$/,$d' | awk 'tot>0{printf "||"};{printf "time="$1":"$2; tot++}' 

If this script is placed in a file called "mkgti", it can be used in a
command such as:

  fundisp foo.fits"[GTI]" | mkgti > gti.filter

The resulting filter file can then be used in various funtools programs:

  funcnts foo.fits"[@gti.filter]" ...

to process only the events in the good-time intervals.




=head1 SEE ALSO



See funtools(n) for a list of Funtools help pages


=cut
